Communication and technology are at the essence of our humanity: they determine the entire trajectory of our development. Communication is the purpose of our existence and technology is the means by which we communicate. Thus, defining communication is critical. Claude Shannon's definition of communication as "reproducing at one point either exactly or approximately a message selected at another point" is a good start, but I think it focuses on the wrong end of the signal. Instead, communication is the broadcast of information from its original location. In this phrasing, I believe communication encompasses nearly all human activity. As is discussed in prologue to *The Information*, information certainly includes not just obvious data like spreadsheets, books, and text messages but also DNA, money, and even matter. Communication, therefore, is involved anytime something is transmitted through time or space. Genes communicate information through time just as readily as the telegraph communicated language through space. Indeed, nature is constantly communicating: light from the stars is communication of distant fusion reactions and a waterfall is communicating bits of water downstream.

With communication as such a central aspect of our existence, humans are naturally looking for ways to extend and augment their ability to communicate. This is where technology comes in: it consists of new methods of communication. Many of our greatest inventions, from the alphabet to the internet, are explicitly designed for enabling new methods of communication and sharing of information, but even inventions from far outside the field of information science can be construed as communication mechanisms. A car is not just a conveyance, it is also a communication mechanism which enables information about our existence to travel through space. From a theoretical perspective, it is not fundamentally different than the fiber optic cables transmitting emails across the globe, though it is substantially slower—but the arc of technology bends towards faster ways of sending messages with more and more information. Indeed, the ultimate technology will be the ability to transmit any piece of information (including ourselves) to a distant location at the speed of light without any loss of accuracy. Or, as it's called in science fiction, a teleporter.
