**9:00pm**: It was almost impossible to find a window of time to do this exercise, despite it's seeming simplicity. While school did not pose a challenge (as readings are still overwhelmingly analog and assignments can be readily prepared on paper), I am also working full-time as the CTO of a [tech startup](http://docnavlab.com) in New York. My job depends entirely on technology. Not only does the work itself entail continual programming, but as a remote worker I also depend on digital forms of communication to keep in touch with my boss. In the era of Slack, it's almost impossible to be offline while simultaneously working. Every time I planned to do this exercise before now, I ended up having an urgent work project come up which required my intervention. Hence, I've resorted to doing my twelve hours overnight, beginning now.

**12:00am**: The first 3 hours passed with ease. Instead of spending the evening hunched over my computer, I spent some quality time reading *The Humor Code*. Given its subject, the reading was suitably enjoyable. At least this exercise is giving me the chance to catch up on classes. As I've had something to do, I haven't really felt the lack of technology yet. I reached for my phone a few times, but I fortunately turned it off before starting this exercise so wasn't able to use it. I'm going to sleep soon and hope that I successfully wake up for the mid-sleep update.

**4:13am**: I missed that by a bit. Turns out when you depend on your iPhone as an alarm, it's hard to wake up naturally on schedule. The anxiety of trying to wake myself up has definitely degraded my sleep quality. I've been checking my watch every time I roll over or wake up momentarily. This exercise has also infected my dreams: I keep dreaming of my computer and all the emails I'll have to catch up on. (Yes, my dreams are often mundane.) I should really have considered buying an analog alarm for this experiment. My natural clock is apparently an hour behind (no wonder I'm often late for class). Fortunately, I can still get a solid 5 more hours of sleep before closing out this journal.

**8:21am**: Make that 4 hours. My strategy of leaving the window shade open to Abu Dhabi sun is working a little too well—it's woken me up earlier than I had planned. No sense in going back to sleep now though, so I'll just read a bit more.

**9:00am**: Yay! I'm finally done. Back to my computer to transcribe this and catch up on the hundreds of emails I've probably received. Overnight this exercise wasn't so bad, but it's definitely clear that my daily life depends on technology. That's why I try to go on a multi-day hike at least once a year, to give my mind a complete respite from technology. Unfortunately it has to be binary for me: it's not really possible to extricate tech from my daily life, especially given my career. Also, I should probably buy an alarm clock—I liked waking up without immediately looking at my phone.
