## A Brief Ride: The Impact of the Pony Express

No communication technology in history has had its image exceed its impact more than the Pony Express. Developed in April 1860 to connect a rapidly growing California with the East Coast, the Pony Express used over 100 resupply stations to allow riders to carry messages from the Atlantic to the Pacific in only 10 days. Despite the exorbitant expense of using a new horse every 10 miles, the twin factors of an increasingly prominent California and the looming threat of Civil War spurred demand for the development of fast East-West communication systems like the Pony Express. However, the Pony Express was insufficient to satisfy that demand and after less than 2 years of operation it closed down and gave way to the transcontinental telegraph. Despite its brief period of operation, it earned itself a place in the imaginations and memories of Americans for decades to come. Thus, due to a combination of historical circumstance, operational romanticism, and technological advancement, the Pony Express has left a cultural footprint which far exceeded its practical utility.

The Pony Express's cultural impact was inherently tied to the massive importance of the political events which loomed over its founding and threatened to tear the American Republic in two. In 1860, as the Pony Express began its first ride, the divisions between the Northern and Southern states had reached untenable proportions. The North, with a primarily manufacturing-based economy, was dependent on protectionist tariffs to keep their industry competitive with the more developed European industries. The South, in contrast, had an economy based heavily on trading cheap cotton with Europe and hence was opposed to any measures limiting free trade. This economic divide was reinforced by a fundamental divide over the issue of slavery, which the Southern economy depended on but had become increasingly unpalatable to Northern abolitionists. While earlier compromises, including the original Three-Fifths Compromise and the Compromise of 1850, had brokered temporary deescalations of tensions, the entry of Minnesota, Oregon, and Kansas as free states had undermined that temporary peace. Thus, the westward expansion of the United States was a key fault line in the debate, with shifts in the power and policies on the Eastern seaboard having profound impacts on the sovereignty of the western states and the legality of slavery in them. These issues were brought to the forefront by the 1860 election, in which the intersection of states rights and the legality of slavery was an essential topic. This election had the potential to determine the fate of the United States for decades to come, as it directly confronted the issue of slavery and threatened to drive the Southern states out of the union. Given this massive impact, the election—and any associated news—was watched closely from coast to coast.

With the political situation in the country so tense, news had acquired a premium valuation: any news of possible secession, the outbreak of violence, or electoral changes was eagerly anticipated across the nation. This intense desire for news, which eventually drove the adoption of the telegraph, was also essential to the development of the Pony Express. With the Pony Express, news of developments in the East could reach California faster than ever before, thus connecting the new Western states with the political developments in the East. Thus, the heightened political drama of 1860 enabled the creation of the Pony Express—but it also crystalized its place in history. Even though the Pony Express operated for only 2 years, it will forever be the technology which brought the key events of 1860–1861 to the West: the election of Abraham Lincoln, the failure of the Crittenden Compromise to resolve tensions, and the secession of the South, were all conveyed to the West via the Pony Express. Given the drama of these events, the Pony Express handily earned its place in the history of American communication technology.

While the events surrounding its founding made the Pony Express a romantic symbol of the American West, the reality of its operation was far less picturesque. As opposed to the stagecoach, which conveyed the mail in a relatively stately vehicle with a team of horses, the Pony Express depended on a single rider traveling alone on their horse across the vast Western territories. Traveling for up to 70 miles in a single journey, before handing off the mail to a rider at the next station, these riders traversed the beautiful but still quite wild American West. In their solo journeys, they faced threats from both man and nature. Traversing the plains, the possibility of an attack from Native Americans was ever present, particularly after the outbreak of the Paiute Indian War in May of 1860. Indeed, at least one Pony Express rider is known to have died from an attack by Native Americans. Beyond these threats from attacks, nature had its own dangers, with riders being fully exposed to the elements as they rode through the harsh exposures of the Rocky Mountains and the Sierra Nevada, receiving shelter only in isolated mail stations. Thus, the life of a Pony Express rider was inherently lonely, but also somewhat heroic, conjuring images of a single man standing up against all threats in their quest to deliver the mail. Given these dangers, and the inherent isolation of the job, it took a special kind of employee to ride the route. Indeed, one famous advertisement painted the isolation and danger of the route in a stark light: “Wanted: Young, skinny, wiry fellows not over eighteen. Must be expert riders, willing to risk death daily. Orphans preferred.” (Bradley 23) These sorts of advertisements, and the realities of the danger on the route, firmly established the image of the Pony Express as the original home for courageous rough riders and mail carriers. Though coming from lowly backgrounds, the Pony Express riders attained a temporary glory in the lore of transit: riding alone across the vast American West, they were intent in their mission of delivering the mail in spite of all dangers. Thus, the symbol of the orphan boys who rode on the Pony Express certainly lent a sense of romance to the entire venture, leaving an outsized mark on the imagination of the American public.

While the original necessity of the Pony Express and the romance of its operation is apparent, it quickly fell below the wheel of technological progress. Even as the riders rode swiftly across the American West, the telegraph raced closely behind. The Pony Express had affirmed that demand for swift East–West communication was there and the telegraph eventually fulfilled that demand at a speed which horses could never match. By October 24, 1861, the telegraph had reached Salt Lake City in Utah, thus creating an unbroken transcontinental line which quickly made the Pony Express obsolete. Indeed, the Express closed a mere 2 days later, signaling the final triumph of machine over man in the realm of communication technology. Ever since that line was connected, the progress of communication has been exclusively through mechanical technologies: the telegraph gave way to the telephone and the telephone gave way to the internet. Though written mail stubbornly persists as a communication mechanism, not since the Pony Express has the fastest way to convey a message been to physically carry it across vast distances. Thus, while technological advancement signaled the end of the Pony Express, it also sealed its place in the history books as the last fast physical communication technology.

The Pony Express fully deserves its place in the history books as one of the most iconic communication technologies. It was born in a year of drama and delivered some of the most important messages of the 19th century. These important messages were carried by young orphan boys riding alone across a vast wilderness. The physical necessity of this mechanism quickly disappeared with the telegraph, thus transforming the Pony Express into an iconic historical image rather than a useful communication technology. Together, these factors have ensured that the impact of the Express on the cultural image of the American West long outlived its practical usefulness. Indeed, a century later, a television series (*Pony Express*) was dedicated to this obsolete communication technology. Even Google, a behemoth of modern communication technology, paid tribute to the imaginative impact of the Pony Express by commemorating its 155th anniversary. Thus, communication technology is more than just technology—it’s also a story, as the dramatic story of the Pony Express shows.

### References

* “155th Anniversary of the Pony Express.” April 14, 2015, http://www.google.com/doodles/155th-anniversary-of-the-pony-express
* Bradley, Glenn Danford (1913). The story of the Pony Express. A. C. McClurg & Co. 
* Godfrey, Anthony (1994). "Pony Express National Historic Trail Historic Resource Study". National Park Service.
* “The First Transcontinental Telegraph System Was Completed October 24, 1861". AmericasLibrary.gov: America's Story from America's Library. Library of Congress.
