I am a prolific user of [Stack Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/) (Stack Exchange's flagship site) and use the service multiple times a day. However, despite this heavy usage, I have never really branched out on to the other sites in the Stack Exchange network. I was aware that the Stack Exchange network hosts multiple communities and have even read some of [Jeff Atwood's posts](http://blog.codinghorror.com/) about the process of extending Stack Overflow into a network. Thus, i was eager to try a new community for myself.

In choosing a community to participate in, I of course wanted to join a community centered on topics which interest me. However, I crucially didn't want it to be too similar to Stack Overflow. Communities like [Server Fault](http://serverfault.com/) and [Programmers](http://programmers.stackexchange.com/) are too similar to Stack Overflow to offer a compelling new experience. Hence, I ruled them out and instead joined the [Science Fiction & Fantasy](http://scifi.stackexchange.com/) Stack Exchange. Science fiction also interests me, but does not directly connect to my professional experience. Surprisingly, it proved more similar to my existing experiences than I had expected.

Since I am already familiar with the Stack Exchange platform, it was easy for me to get started on this new community. However, instead of immediately diving in with questions and answers, I spent a good amount of time simply reading through other threads. This helped me to get a sense of the norms for this new community and how I should communicate if I wanted to be respected.

To my surprise, there is a very strong norm of logic and evidence in this community. Despite dealing with fictional concepts, the denizens of this site demand that you meet an almost scientific bar with answers. You're expected to cite primary source texts and to have compelling evidence to back up your answers, even to questions as silly as "Why is Yoda green?"

Once I understood the community more, I asked my first question on science fiction. It ended up provoking a lot of debate when I questioned why Jedi knights use lightsabers (instead of more efficient weapons, like a blaster gun). While many replies surfaced, including frequent primary source texts, I actually found the replies lacking in intellectual substance. Instead of offering arguments for why it's smart for Jedi kings to use lightsabers, the respondents merely cited in-text explanations from knights explaining their preference for lightsabers. Though these responses were technically correct, they didn't answer the meat of the question: what is the military advantage of lightsabers? In fact, appeals towards "elegance" were particularly problematic because Sith Lords also use lightsabers. It seems like they, at least, should be focused more on military effectiveness than an arbitrary pursuit of elegance.

Frustrated by the lack of insight displayed in the responses, I decided to stop participating in the site and thus never accumulated additional karma. In this frustration, the consistency of the Stack Exchange network is revealed. By emphasizing sourced answers, the network has encouraged a literal interpretation and a rigid focus on whatever answer evidence can be found for. While this is often beneficial, it ignores the fact that logic and reasoning can sometimes be more compelling than evidence. Whether through a superficial reference to the language manual on Stack Overflow or a canonical quotation, answers on Stack Exchange properties seem to be more the result of Googling than thinking.